Most statistical analysis of genomic
data should be done interactively. And what we usually mean
by that is by using plots. Another way of saying this is
that you should take big data and make it as small as possible,
as quickly as possible. This is a quote attributed to
Robert Gentleman at Genentech. And what he was trying to say is that
if you have a gigantic data set, say, made of millions or billions of reads, it's very hard to visualize what's
going on with those data or understand the different properties or
the characteristics of those data. And so the idea is you want to summarize
them down just enough that you're able to plot them and visualize them and
try to figure out what's going on. And it's really important to do
interactive analysis with lots of plotting, because sometimes
the summary measures, the statistical summary measures
that are often reported, say for associations can be
a little bit deceptive. As an example of that,
here are four plots. Each plot corresponds to
a different data set. Each of these data sets seems
statistically identical if you look at the coefficient for the slope,
the p-value for the slope, or the correlation coefficient. So all of these data sets from
the perspective of statistical summary measures are identical. But as you can see, there seem to be very different patterns
going on in these different data sets. For example, the pattern in the upper
right-hand corner looks a bit like sort of a quadratic shape. The pattern in the lower left-hand
corner has a clear outlier, and so does the panel in the lower right-hand
corner in a totally different direction. And so the idea is the thing that you
want to be doing is taking your summaries of your raw data and plotting them as
quickly as possible, so you can try to identify characteristics or features
of the data that might be important. So interactivity allows for
more discovery. And so one thing that you want to do
when doing an interactive analysis, where you're trying to
discover what's going on, is show as much of the data
as you can in your plots. So here's an example. On the left is what I
would call a bad plot. And lots of people,
particularly statisticians, don't like plots like this because it
shows bar plots with confidence bounds. But those bar plots don't show
any of the actual raw data. So it's very hard to know if there was
an outlier driving any of the analysis or how many data points were even
used to create these bar plots. On the other hand, on the right-hand side,
there's a much better plot. It shows the same information as the bar
plot in terms of showing the average value in the confidence bounds, but
it also shows the raw data. So you can actually see when there's
differences in distributions. And in this case,
there's only three points in each group. So you might have a little bit less faith
in any conclusion you might draw than you might get from using the bad plot, where you don't actually know
how much data is in the plot. Another thing that you might
do is plot replicates. This is a very common plot that
you would do when you're doing an interactive analysis. So here you might want to compare, say, you ran the same sample through the
technology twice, technical replicates. And you want to see if those two
replicates produce similar results. So here's a plot on x,
the x-axis is replicate one, and on the y-axis is replicate two. And so here, they look very,
very correlated. So that's very good, you might see
this and be comforted or think, okay, this technology is doing very well. There's a couple of tricky things, though,
especially about plotting replicates. So the first thing is be careful of scale. So if you go back to this plot, 99% of the
data is in the tiny little lower left-hand corner that I've shown below to, below and
to the left of the light blue line here. So what you're seeing, just sort of the 1% of the data
that ends up getting spread out. So one way that you can deal with
this sort of tightly clustered data, particularly for replicates,
is to use transforms. One example of a data transform
is the log transform. So if you take the log of the data and then make the same plot,
you can see they're correlated. But now the data is much more spread out
and all of the data that was super tightly clustered down in the lower left-hand
corner has been spread out a little bit. You get a little bit better idea
about what's going on in the plot. Another thing that people typically
do when comparing two samples or two replicates is instead of plotting
one replicate versus the other, they make something that's
called a Bland-Altman plot. In genomics, this is often called an MA
plot, and this is one of the most common plots and widely used in
a variety of different technologies. So the idea here is rather than plotting
replicate one on the x-axis and replicate two on the y-axis, you add
the two replicates on the x-axis and you subtract the two re,
replicates on the y-axis. So what does this mean? Moving from left to right are the,
in this case, it's gene, each dot represents a gene. On the left-hand side are the genes
that are very lowly expressed. And on the right-hand side are the genes
that are very highly expressed. Then if you look at the y-axis, how far you are from zero is how different
the two replicates are from each other. And so what you would like to see is all
the points lining exactly on the zero line, which obviously never
happens in real life. But what you can see here is,
for example, a trend. There seem to be more differences
between the replicates for the lowly expressed genes. This is a very common phenomenon. And so it's better to see that
when you make the MA style plot as opposed to making the plot of
one replicate versus the other. One thing that you should
be very careful of, and is a very common problem in genomics,
is what has been coined ridiculograms. So a ridiulogram is defined as,
in general, it can be something a little
bit more general than this. But it has been defined as a network plot
that looks beautiful but communicates very little information and appears on
the cover of Science and Nature. And so what these plots are, you often
see these sort of hairball-type plots. There are other plots just like them that
don't actually communicate a message. They just kind of look beautiful. And so the point of statistical
graphics is both to look pretty and to be you know, enjoyable to look at,
but more importantly, to communicate scientific
information to the reader. So bewaring ridiculograms is an important
component of making sure your plots are interpretable.